[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Get
a pen and some paper out
because you're
going to learn more
about your body's
ecosystem in one hour
than you ever thought possible.
Compton Rom is a microbiologist
who extended his knowledge far
beyond his master's degree into
the worlds of interconnected
information systems,
which brings
a new light to the
world of microbes.
Compton says that our bodies
cannot sustain good health
without good microbes, and that
we must learn to respect them.
Toward that end, he
founded a company
that uses microbes and
frequencies to recover
our health.
And I have to say,
his work is absolutely
mind-altering in my book.
I think this is one of the most
fascinating subjects of all.
But before we even get
going on the microbes,
let's talk a little bit
about your own background,
and it was a convoluted path
arriving where you are now.
And just tell us a
little bit about that.
>>COMPTON ROM: Well, I
actually got my start
by going to medical school at
the University of Michigan.
And I finished up my schooling
by getting a Master's Degree
in Microbiology at Michigan
State University, where
I worked under the auspices
of the Microbial Ecology
Center, which looked at
the beneficial microbes
and how did they degrade toxins
in the external environment.
But how also microbes
were really important
in agriculture.
So from there, I
thought I was going
to get a career
in biotechnology,
but I fell into the
laps of IBM and I
started working for the
pharmaceutical companies
looking over gobs of data and
analyzing data, and seeing
where things worked
and where things didn't
work based on the
research out there.
And then I took a path
thinking, oh, you know,
the internet was
really good for me,
so I started working with IBM
again and being farmed out
for search engine companies
like Google and Yahoo,
and a little company
called Inktomi.
And that was when I
started getting access
to all these university archives
and university research.
And I really started
looking into the research
of alternative science and
how they became validated
through the scientific research.
And as we know, a lot of these
scientific research papers
have been buried and not really
being shown to the public.
But I had full access to them.
And I knew that natural herbs
can actually-- back then,
they were curing AIDS.
And I knew microbes were
actually killing viruses,
that you didn't need
vaccines to kill the viruses.
You can actually use microbes.
And so from that
research, that's
how I started a little company
called Ascended Health.
The Native Americans, they
actually traded in this earth.
They actually have edible clays.
Every tribe, every medicine
man has his own set
of herbs that he likes
to use, but they also
have edible clays.
And you actually saw this
during the hurricane in Haiti,
when all the people on
CNN were eating mud pies.
They were actually eating
clay to sustain them.
>>REGINA: Now see, we
watched that and thought,
oh, these poor people
are having to eat dirt.
We didn't understand
that there were some--
>>ROM: They were
getting minerals.
>>REGINA: -components
of nutrition there.
>>ROM: That's right.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: You go down to
the Peru, to the Amazon,
and you look at
the birds in Manu
eating the clay off
the side of the rivers.
And there's a big
tourist attraction.
But they don't really tell
them that the reason why
the birds are eating the clay
is because the clay is filled
with bentonite and
it coats their system
so they can eat the
poisonous seeds in the Amazon
that the other
animals can't eat,
and they don't get poisoned.
>>REGINA: Well, see, this is
what I love about your work.
It doesn't matter where
we go in the conversation,
we get all these
incredible side notes.
And so now on a
large theme, let's
go to the world of
microbes and give us
an introduction in
terms of how long
they've been here as opposed
to as how they survive,
how the world really will
be their way or the highway.
>>ROM: Well, let's go
over the latest science.
I always like to start
everything else out
in basic fundamental science,
and then go to the esoteric.
So all the work
that we do is based
on solid scientific research.
If it's not researched, if it's
not validated by scientists
and basically printed
in a scientific journal,
then I don't usually
pursue that line of work.
Well lately, since 2003, there's
all this new science coming out
that microbes are very
beneficial to human life.
And it's now called
the Microbiome Project.
And it started out through
the Genome Project,
when they were starting
to study and sequence
the DNA of the human being.
And they finally sequenced
And they go, wow, we did it.
We sequenced the DNA
in a human being,
let's see how many genes are in
humans, because humans are so
evolved they must
have more genes
than any animal in the world.
Well, it turns out that the
little Arabidopsis plant, which
is a little tiny plant
that grows in the cold,
has about 128,000 genes.
And the humans only
had as many genes
as the little lowly
fly, the Drosophila fly,
probably like 30,000 genes.
So the scientists
were wondering,
how could a complex organism
like the human being
exist versus a little
organism like the fly
exist together and be
so different; but yet,
the amount of genes that
they have is the same.
And these scientists
are saying, well,
there's got to be
something else.
So let's study the
microbes in the body.
And they thought that it was
going to be a little project,
but they found something
really fascinating.
They found that out of all the
living cells in this ecosystem
we call the human
body, they found
that there was over 100
trillion living cells
in this ecosystem we
call the human body.
But when you count all the
human cells, all the skin cells,
the eye cells, the cardiac
cells, the hair cells,
there's only 10
trillion of those cells.
>>REGINA: Do the
math on that then.
>>ROM: Do the math.
So only 10 trillion out
of 100 trillion cells
were human cells.
That meant 90% of the living
cells in this ecosystem
in the human body
weren't even human.
They were actually
microbial cells.
They're made of mostly bacteria.
But we have viruses,
we have parasites,
we have fungi in our
bodies, and they all
call this body our home.
So I started reading
all this material.
I found that actually
fascinating that only 10%
of the human body is human.
But then when the
scientists were going,
well, let's study the DNA.
I bet 98% of the DNA in
the human body is human.
Well, guess the percentage
of the DNA is human.
2%.
>>REGINA: 2.
>>ROM: 2.
So do the math.
2% to 10%.
We're only 2%
human or 10% human.
But the fact of the
matter is, the result
is the majority of our body
doesn't come from our genes.
It comes from our environment.
And that comes from the microbes
that we have in our body.
>>REGINA: And they've
been around for--
>>ROM: Millions--
>>REGINA: But let's talk
about the very beginning.
The beginning.
>>ROM: So at the very
beginning, this Earth
is 4.5 billion years old.
It took the Earth
a billion years
to cool down enough
for the first organisms
to live in the Earth.
So the first organisms
on this Earth
were unicellular organisms,
and they were basically
the bacteria.
And science has found out
now that space dust coming
from space are all
particles of bacteria.
And when they landed
on this Earth,
they were the first organisms
to actually colonize
this Earth, the bacteria.
And the bacteria actually had
little bacteria on top of them,
and those little bacteria
actually had viruses.
So the bacteria actually have
viruses infecting the bacteria.
And there was no fungi,
there's no parasites,
it was just bacteria and viruses
that were living on this Earth.
And four 3 billion
years-- the Earth
is 4.5 billion years old, OK.
From 1 billion years
to 3.5 billion years,
only the bacteria
lived on this Earth.
And the only things-- they
only thought two things.
Can I eat you?
Can you eat me?
And they looked at this
Earth-- they basically
looked at every place on this
Earth, they either lived in it
or they broke it down to eat it.
That's the only
thing that they did.
They said, oh, there's
not a bacteria that's
living in this particular
strata of Earth,
I guess I'm going to
set up camp there.
I can live on rocks.
Well, guess what?
I can live in water.
Or guess what?
I can live somewhere else.
I can live in the heat.
You actually find bacteria in
the most extreme temperatures
of the Earth because they
can live in anything.
They could break down anything.
We find bacteria breaking down
the nuclear waste of Chernobyl.
When you actually
walked in Chernobyl,
there's black slime inside
the nuclear reactor.
>>REGINA: They're
doing their job.
They're actually neutralizing,
or consuming, radiation.
>>ROM: They're
consuming radiation.
>>REGINA: Nuclear waste.
>>ROM: Yeah, they
can consume anything.
And in the 1970s, there
was this huge accident
that happened in the
Love Canal in New York.
Remember that?
>>REGINA: I remember that, yes.
>>ROM: It was actually the birth
of the environmental movement.
You know the Indian
with the tearing eye?
That was because
of the Love Canal.
And the Love Canal was because
a chemical company, unnamed, had
buried transistors
and-- big transistors,
the kind that had dioxin
and PBBs and PCBs up
on the telephone poles.
And they just buried them.
And it slowly leaked
out into the ground.
And it leaked out so
much that the frogs
started growing three heads.
And it was like, no big
deal, until babies started
to have malformations and
congenital deformities.
And so the government
said, wow, we
need to start doing
something like this
because this is all
over the United States.
And that was the first
Superfund site that happened.
And so the government of New
York and the United States
government actually put
the biggest punitive damage
awards towards the state of
New York against this chemical
company, and it was like
$10 billion or something
like that to clean the site up.
And because of all the lawyers
and the legal wranglings,
it actually took 10 years to get
this to come out into the open.
So during that time, scientists
kept monitoring the Love Canal.
And over a five year span,
this young scientist came in
and he started measuring
the PCB levels, which
had a 50,000 year half life.
The scientist's
like, there's no way
that this thing is
going to get broken
down enough in our lifetime.
And these scientists from
the chemical company--
they sent scientists in,
they said five years later,
why don't you just measure the
PBB levels and the PCB levels
there another time.
And the scientist's like,
it's just a waste of my time.
In fact, if anything
there's going
to be more because
of all the leakage.
But they went in there, there
was a significant decrease--
there was like a 25%
decrease in PBBs and PCBs.
And the scientist is
like, wait a minute.
Something's breaking this down.
I mean it's not dissipating.
It's not breaking
down by itself.
Something is actively
breaking this down.
And what they did was
they looked at the muck
in the bottom of the river.
They found out that microbes
were breaking down the PBBs.
It is now a science called
Bacterial and Bioremediation.
So every time there's an
oil spill that happens,
we don't clean it up any
more like the Exxon Valdez.
We just throw microbes at it
because they will eat the oil.
And fortunately for us, when the
Gulf blew up with the oil spill
there, there were natural
microbes already eating that.
And believe it or
not, the dispersants
that they threw
in there actually
helped the microbes eat
the oil better and faster,
because it actually disperses--
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
Because there was a
lot of controversy
around those dispersants.
>>ROM: Yeah.
There was a lot of controversy
around the dispersants
because it got into
the bloodstream.
But there was a
silver lining to that,
and the microbes actually
broke them down even more.
And another thing was that
the PBBs and the PCBs,
they were actually broken
down not just by one microbe,
it was actually broken down
by a community of microbes.
In nature, nature
works by community.
Nature doesn't work by
just one person, right?
To me having one
company form a monopoly
and kind of like towering
over their competition,
it doesn't work in nature.
You have to have a whole bunch
of companies working in concert
together to create
a real economy.
So with this economy and this
system, it worked like this.
It worked like there was one
microbe that saw the PBBs.
It wasn't a very
big microbe, and it
wasn't the most
populated microbe.
It was this one
little tiny microbe
that basically made its
living one microbe at a time
versus all the 10,000,
10 million microbes
that are out there.
But it ate PBBs and PCBs.
And it ate it where it
only ate one bond of it.
And its excrement
was PBB plus one,
because it only
ate one electron.
So its excrement was
actually out there,
and then another microbe
goes, wow, PBB plus one.
I think I can eat that.
>>REGINA: So it
ate the excrement.
>>ROM: It ate the
excrement and its excrement
became food for
the next microbe.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: It became a
whole chain of microbes
that started to eat
this in concert.
And they were actually eating
the excrement of each other.
It happens in
nature all the time.
>>REGINA: So that's what's
happening in our bodies.
>>ROM: That's what's
When we eat food in our
bodies, the first person
that eats the food are
actually the microbes.
It isn't us.
It's the microbes
that actually eat it.
We cannot eat food and digest
food unless the microbes digest
it first.
They get first dibs.
>>REGINA: And so they're
going through this break
down, this excreting,
and then other microbes
are consuming that.
I assume there are chemical
reactions within that?
>>ROM: Yeah.
There are chemical reactions.
There are things
that are being made.
There are antioxidants
There are vitamins
that are being made.
The only reason why we
have 20 essential vitamins
is because there isn't
bacteria to create those 20
essential vitamins.
If we didn't have
bacteria in our bodies,
we'd have 10,000
essential vitamins
that we would need
in our bodies.
The other 10,000 are
made by all the microbes.
>>REGINA: So now
what happens when
we start looking at the
whole cleanliness issue?
I mean, keep the
baby off the floor.
Don't let the baby crawl
around on a dirty floor,
put things in its mouth.
And we have fruit
and vegetable wash
to make sure anything
that's on our vegetables--
even the organic ones--
they're nice and clean.
What about the notion of
this kind of cleanliness?
>>ROM: You're talking
about hygiene.
And, yes, hygiene
is very important.
We need to keep the
bad microbes off of us,
but we also have to
keep in mind that we
can't go so far that we
actually kill the good microbes.
And in order to understand
that, let's go back
to the beginning
of our conversation
when the Earth was
a billion years old
and the first microbes
started to colonize the Earth.
And the microbes lived on
this Earth for over 2 and 1/2
billion years before the first
multicellular organism, called
the algae, colonized the Earth.
So this higher life form
went into the Earth--
and the microbes have been
here for over 2 billion years.
And they were saying, I can
eat you, you can eat me,
we can break everything down.
And the first higher organism,
the algae, came in there
and said, hey, you know what?
I'm more evolved that you guys.
I'm going to come in and I'm
just going to set up shop.
And the microbes are
looking at him like--
It's like us being in sixth
grade going into a new school,
and just because we're older
than all the other kids,
we're going to take
over that school.
But all the other kids, the
fifth graders and the existing
sixth graders go, we know
who the good teachers are,
we know who the
bad teachers are.
>>REGINA: They know
the lay of the land.
>>ROM: They know
We know where you're
going to get beat up.
And basically, new kid,
if you don't serve us,
we're going to beat you up.
So what are you
going to do for us?
And that's what the microbes
did to the lowly algae.
And they basically
said, algae, you either
serve us or we're
going to eat you.
What's it going to be?
And the algae goes,
you know what?
I'm going to hang out and we're
going to form groups of algae
together.
And they actually
formed the first life
form called the Hydra.
And the Hydra was a
cylindrical object
that basically had a
funnel to funnel in water,
and it had motile feet
that actually moved around.
And they were the first
kind of like living plants,
but they were actually
collections of multicellular
organisms that
actually moved around.
But microbes lived in them.
And they were the things that
algae said, hey microbes.
Why don't you come in here
and we'll protect you.
We'll be your
vessel so you don't
have to defend
yourself all the time.
And guess what?
We're going to collect
food for you too.
We're going to have
this little canal
and we're going to put
food inside this tube,
and you guys can eat it first.
And then we'll have your scraps,
we'll have your excrement.
And we'll also
move you from place
to place so you don't have to
expend all your energy moving.
And that's how the microbes
became the mafia of this Earth.
And they said, OK, you're
going to work for us now.
Fast forward to human beings.
We're just a large hydra.
We feed the microbes, we
give them a place to eat,
and we give them
the food to eat.
We give them a body to stay
in, then they're protected,
and we move around.
We do all the work for them.
They basically play us
like little Wii machines,
and they tell us what to eat.
And this is all
scientifically proven.
You change the
microbes in your body,
you actually change the
cravings in your body.
The microbes tell
us what to eat,
they tell us what to think,
they give us our emotions.
And they also protect us.
>>REGINA: So this is
huge, because now we're
looking at a time
when we've been
genetically engineering food.
When we've been certainly adding
a huge toxin load to the food
supplies.
We have a lot of stress.
It seems like we're doing a lot
of things that would tick off
our microbial community.
>>ROM: That's right.
And with the age of antibiotics
that started over 80 years ago,
it's just been killing
off the natural microbes
that call this body our home.
Like imagine if
your neighborhood--
you know all the neighbors
in your neighborhood--
imagine if you kick them
all out of their houses,
and then the squatters
would move in.
Like these people just
roaming the streets
and they don't know
anything about your house.
And all of a sudden, your
house starts falling apart
because they don't know
where the hammers are.
They don't have a mortgage
on the house, so--
>>REGINA: These are
the antibiotics?
>>ROM: No.
These are the bad
microbes that move in
because the antibiotics were
basically the policemen that
kicked everybody out of the
house, that killed everybody.
>>REGINA: I see.
That killed the good microbes.
>>ROM: That killed
all the good microbes.
The microbes, they consider
this body their house.
And if you look at the point of
view from their point of view,
you'll see that we're
not the only inhabitants
of this ecosystem
called the human body.
In fact, we're the minority.
We have been living in our own
personal apartheid for hundreds
of years, and we
don't even know it.
When South Africa finally
said, hey, guess what?
The rest of the
population matters.
Maybe we should include
them in our government
and maybe we should include them
and have a say in a government.
10 years later, they're
a thriving economy.
>>REGINA: And I see
this in you, and also
your beautiful partner, Janet.
And this whole
notion of respecting
what's in your
body as this colony
that you're simply housing
is a whole different way
to look at the healing
process as well.
And maybe briefly--
we're going to take
a break in a few
minutes here-- but I
think there's enough time for
you to talk about how healing
actually begins
when we're looking
at ourselves as a colony.
So you find out you maybe
have food poisoning.
That's pretty
violent, pretty quick.
You throw up, it's done.
But let's look at more chronic
kinds of conditions, or even
the common cold.
How do you start
working with this colony
without the introduction
of artificial things
that can actually be harmful
to the friendly microbes
and bacteria?
>>ROM: So let's start with
the common cold, for example.
The human body is
known to have at least
three different immune systems.
The immune system that we call
our humoral immune system,
our antibodies, is actually our
double reserve immune system.
It's only supposed
to be tapped into
once our secondary
immune system, called
our cellular immune
system, which
is mediated by human
cells called the T cells,
are kind of tapped out.
Then the antibodies come in.
That's our double reserve
immune system, our T cells,
which is our cellular
immune system,
our secondary immune system.
Again, this is not
scientific fact.
This is my interpretation
of the immune system.
But scientific fact is that
70% to 80% of our immune system
is this kind of like
undefined immune system called
our "innate immunity."
But science is finding out
that this innate immunity
are actually the microbes.
That's why when we
were going to school,
some kids got sick all the
time, some kids never got sick.
I was one of those kids
that never got sick.
I mean, I could eat dirt,
I could eat anything.
>>REGINA: I was
one of those, too.
>>ROM: And that's because
the microbes in our bodies
were so diverse, and there were
so many microbes in our body
that called this their home,
they were defending their turf.
If your child is so
hygienic that he doesn't
have the microbes, they don't
have the natural defenders
in our body.
>>REGINA: And then if you add
to that all these processed
foods, which means
you're definitely
not getting the load
of healthy ones.
>>ROM: When you're
eating processed foods,
again teleologically,
the microbes
are hundreds and thousands of
years old because they just
replicate and
replicate over time.
And when they're
eating a sandwich,
they're expecting real meat,
which they're not getting;
they're expecting real wheat,
which they're not getting,
and they're expecting
real butter, which
they're not getting.
They get this stuff called
artificial mayonnaise.
And they're looking at
this food like, I've never
seen this stuff before.
So they--
>>REGINA: So they
can't break it down.
They can't go through
the normal processes.
>>ROM: They can't break it down.
They kind of die off.
They actually get toxified.
>>REGINA: And then we're toxic.
When they're dead--
>>ROM: They're toxic--
>>REGINA: -we're toxic.
>>ROM: -and we're toxic.
Because when you're
eating food, you're
never eating sterile food.
You're actually eating food
with millions of microbes.
And guess what?
Those microbes are actually
feeding on this mutant food.
So guess what?
You get mutant microbes.
So your body gets microbes
that exist in your cell that
have been growing
on saccharin, that's
been growing on high
fructose corn syrup,
and they've never
seen this body before.
>>REGINA: We're going
to get into all of that.
And not only that, in private
conversation before we started
rolling, you're also saying
that they determine when we're
going to die and what
we're going to die of.
I mean, the microbes
run the show.
We'll talk more about that,
high fructose corn syrup,
and much more when we return.
Well, flu season is
just about upon us.
And now they're trying
to funnel everybody
down to your local drugstore
to get your vaccines.
But in reality,
there's another way
to deal with flu that's much
more native to our bodies
and much less damaging
in terms of side effects.
So, okay, you're starting
to feel the chills,
your mind's going fuzzy
on you, and your nose
is starting to run.
You've got the flu.
Now how do you start doing
this from this perspective?
>>ROM: From the
microbial perspective?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ROM: First is to get an
education as to what the flu is
and how we get it, and how
our body combats the flu.
And vaccines, despite
popular opinion,
isn't the only way our bodies
actually fight off viruses.
Actually, our bodies
naturally fight off viruses
just by themselves.
And the way our body
fights off the virus
is actually a really good thing.
Having fever, as long as it's
not too high, is a good thing.
Having a runny nose, as long
as it's not driving you crazy,
is actually a good thing
because you're actually
expelling toxins
out of your body.
So it's not a bad
thing to have the flu.
It's just in our
lifestyle, we just
can't do without having the
go, go, go all the time.
>>REGINA: So you just have
to take the time for it.
But let's talk about the
consciousness of it too.
>>ROM: Right.
So as a matter of fact,
when I started digging
into the literature
way back in 1964,
scientists were finding
out that actually bacteria
actually eat viruses.
And they found that
bacteria actually
create their own antimicrobials.
They're basically
their own antibiotics.
The antibiotics that
we know now are only
created by one sector of
microbes, basically the yeasts.
But bacteria and
viruses and parasites,
they all emit chemicals
to kill each other.
And the most
powerful of the bunch
is the bacteria, where the
yeast create antibiotics we now
know as penicillin
and rifampisin.
The bacteria create these
small polypeptides called
bacteriocins, and they're
extremely powerful.
And once these bacteria start
creating these bacteriocins,
it eats up these
viruses like crazy.
We have a species
of lactobacillus
that creates these bacteriocins
that have been scientifically
proven to eat up double-stranded
DNA viruses, which are mainly
the flu viruses and
the herpes viruses.
So upon contact, you
don't need a vaccine.
In fact, you don't
need a vaccine at all.
You just start
creating a body that
helps create these lactobacilli,
or you take these bacteriocins
into your body just through
like droplets of water,
and the viruses get eaten away.
>>REGINA: But how
do you do that?
What form do the come in?
How do you take these?
>>ROM: Our form is called
the ProAlive Probiotic,
and you just take little drops.
If you ever go to Mexico and
you get Montezuma's Revenge,
you'll know what one little
droplet of water or bacteria
is doing.
>>REGINA: Yes, or even the ice.
>>ROM: That's right.
So these probiotics that say
that oh, it has to be coated
and it has to get
past your stomach.
Anybody that's gone
into Mexico knows
that you get one little droplet
of water on your lettuce,
you're going to get all
these diarrhea symptoms.
So bacteria can actually go
through the stomach lining
and get into your
small intestines
and rapidly replicate,
and start producing
all these bacteriocins.
>>REGINA: So you're
saying for example,
in your company, you're making
one that is just a drop or two,
would actually go in and
start countering those?
>>ROM: That's right.
And it counters it in
many different ways.
And I can go into it, but it
counters it mainly chemically
through the use of
these bacteriocins.
But these microbes
are actually trained
to seek out the viruses.
We train them like Navy SEALs,
and we have a specific way
of doing it with all these
little red little wells.
And we train them
to eat viruses.
We also train them
to eat toxins.
We actually collect rainwater
from Detroit and New
York and California and
Florida, and we actually
train these microbes to break
down mercury and arsenic.
Because they'll eat anything.
>>REGINA: How interesting.
So that information is
already encoded in them
so they will go into your body
and start doing the same thing.
>>ROM: That's called our
Active Detox Probiotic,
because they're
plantarums, they're
lactobacillus plantarums in
the family of plantarums, which
actively go out and
eat mercury and arsenic
and lead because
that's their food.
And when they go into your body,
not only do they replicate,
they actually teach
the other microbes
what to do through just
like a song, for example.
You may or may not
hate Michael Jackson,
but if anybody hears a
Michael Jackson song,
I don't care what's in
your head at the time,
you're coming out of there
thinking Michael Jackson.
But it's the same thing
with a Mozart song.
Microbes act the same way.
When a strong microbe
starts beating out
a particular signal,
all the other microbes
are going to learn from them.
And slowly, your symptoms
start to ameliorate
through the use of
taking these probiotics.
>>REGINA: So probiotics
is a really good thing
to do, how about the
consciousness end of it?
Because if stressful thoughts
and thoughts of anger,
sadness and so forth can allow
negative microbes or bacteria
to replicate more rapidly,
what happens with the opposite?
>>ROM: Yeah.
Well, having good
thoughts and good,
pleasing thoughts and
surrounding yourself
in an environment
where you're calm
and your body's not stressed
so you don't have your stress
hormones is very important.
And thinking good thoughts
actually-- Masaru Emoto
actually would
write words of love
on water so you're
drinking structured water.
A lot of people believe
in alkaline water.
I'm not a real big
believer in alkalinity
because the body kind
of neutralizes itself.
>>REGINA: It self-regulates.
>>ROM: Yeah, it self-regulates.
>>REGINA: Although
some people do
say that if you
go to acidic, you
do end up with certain
chronic diseases.
So do you say it's
something else?
>>ROM: I'd say it's
something else.
I mean, as a microbiologist,
I know for a fact
that unless you have an acidic
skin, you will get breakouts.
Unless you have an acidic
gut, you will get fat.
Because the microbes
that determine slimness,
it's called bacteroides, can
only live in an acidic gut.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
And here we're doing all
this with alkaline water
and alkaline foods, everything
to reduce our acidity,
may not be such a great idea.
Of course, again, it's
in the extreme, isn't it?
>>ROM: Yeah, it's
in the extreme.
Everything has to be in balance.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk about
out of balance a little bit,
in terms of let's
say we try, but we
have a less than optimal diet.
And that's a lot of people.
Maybe they go and have
a latte in the morning
with a shot of vanilla.
Maybe a muffin to go
with that as well.
It's going to be made out
of white bleached flour.
So is there something we can
do to ameliorate those effects
microbially if
we're eating poorly?
What can we do there?
>>ROM: Well, the
easiest way to do things
is start eating foods
that are high in microbes,
and those are the
fermented foods.
So the basic bottom-line
fermented foods
are the yogurts, the
kefirs, and the kombuchas.
I don't know how good they
will do the average person,
but they'll do
better than anything.
>>REGINA: Well, there's
kimchi, sauerkraut.
There are, I mean--
>>ROM: The next level--
>>REGINA: -ethnic.
>>ROM: The next level
are the ethic foods,
are the kimchis and
the sauerkrauts.
The more sour and
foul-tasting the food is,
it's probably better for you.
That's the best
thing that I can say.
>>REGINA: Hold your nose.
>>ROM: The Japanese eat this
amazing food called natto,
and it's made from fermented
soybeans on rice straw.
And what natto does,
natto is a bacillus
called bacillus
subtilis, and they
make this slimy goo
that tastes horrible.
But when you eat it,
it actually breaks down
and eats away at all
your arterial plaques
throughout your body.
And your body starts to-- you
lower your blood pressure,
your cholesterol goes down.
And you see the
Japanese that eat this,
they hardly have
any disease at all.
So the Japanese, they actually
ferment a lot of their foods.
And they ferment a
lot of their drinks.
Like in Okinawa, I was drinking
this wonderful fermented tea
made of turmeric.
And the turmeric is a root,
it's kind of like a ginger root.
But when you eat it, it's
a natural Cox-2 inhibitor,
so it ameliorates pain.
But it also goes in your brain
and it breaks down the amyloid
plaque that prevents
Parkinson's disease,
and it also prevents
Alzheimer's.
But it's very difficult
to get in your brain.
The easy way to get it
is by fermenting it.
So the Japanese would--
>>REGINA: They
ferment the turmeric?
>>ROM: They ferment
the turmeric.
>>REGINA: How does that go?
I mean, what form is it?
>>ROM: Well, the way that we're
doing it in Ascended Health
is we're actually
making these foods
and these concoctions
where we're
fermenting a lot of
the foods that we eat.
So because you're already
fermenting it in your body--
if you didn't know, because
when you're eating food
the act of the
bacterial breakdown
in your body in the absence of
oxygen is called fermentation.
So you're already fermenting it.
So when we're fermenting
it on the outside using
friendly microbes, what
your body's already getting
is the secondary metabolites and
it's already being broken down.
And the microbes inside
your body are going,
wow, I don't have to
do my job anymore,
so I don't have to expend the
energy breaking this down.
I'm going to break it down
into the further constituents,
the real constituents
that actually help
your body, the ones
that-- these microbes,
they actually will
make the antioxidants.
They will make the
skin protective layer.
We actually have
over 600 species
of microbes on our face.
And once you start looking and
getting the healthy microbes
and you put it on
your face, your face
starts to look
like a child again.
I surf all the time
and I'm out in the sun.
>>REGINA: Your skin is amazing.
I know, you're what
85, 95 years old.
Something like that.
I have no idea how old you are.
But whatever age you are,
your skin is like a child's.
It's so shiny and
clear and beautiful.
>>ROM: Thank you.
Well, for the record,
I am 52 years of age.
I don't say I'm 52 years
old, because that's just
a belief system.
>>REGINA: Well, your skin is 25.
>>ROM: Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, we know that my
skin didn't always used
to be this way.
I'm looking at my skin
from the point of view
of the microbes,
so my wife and I,
we don't use any products
that would actually
kill the microbes on our skin.
We actually looked
into saying, OK, skin,
and the microbes that live
on your skin, what can
we do to help you?
Because it's the skin that
actually makes the compounds
that actually activate the
genes to turn on the collagen
and to turn on the elastins.
>>REGINA: You have a
lot of women's ears,
and men's probably, who
have just perked up to this.
>>ROM: OK, so what
people don't know
is that there were
certain herbs that people
use to actually enhance
the collagen in your face.
But they don't
work all that well.
And people are going, wow,
I tried all these herbs
and I tried all this collagen,
I tried all this hyaluronic acid
but it doesn't work that well.
Maybe it worked
for a little while.
Well, how would you like it if
the genes for hyaluronic acid
and the genes for collagen
and the genes for elastin
were actually turned
on inside your skin?
>>REGINA: Yeah, that'd be good.
>>ROM: And guess what?
The microbes do that.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>ROM: How would you like it
if a protective layer of sebum
was actually made on
your skin that actually
repairs the damage done by UV?
The microbes do that.
Yet, we're putting
stuff on our face
to kill the natural microbes,
to kill the very things that
are actually--
>>REGINA: And that starts when
you put soap on your face,
washing your face with
soap and harsh cleansers.
>>ROM: And harsh cleansers.
The acne medicine,
I forgot what it's
called, but the acne
medicine that actually kills
all the bacteria, not
just the bad bacteria,
but the good bacteria.
So when the bacteria we-- we're
actually making concoctions now
in our skin care line.
We have this oil called
the I Am Beautiful oil
and we actually put these
microbial components in there
where we actually mixed the
microbes with these herbs.
And the microbes
break down these herbs
and make a slimy goo.
And then we put them in an oil
and you put them on your face
and this I Am Beautiful oil
gets subjected in your face
and it literally feels
like your skin is glowing,
and it feels like
your skin is growing.
And I can't describe it,
and I can't prove it.
>>REGINA: But that's
really the microbes
that are-- what are they doing?
You're just feeding them
what they need and they're
starting to produce--
>>ROM: They're actually
producing the antioxidants.
They are actually
producing the compounds
that prevent the collagen
from breaking down,
because they need the
collagen to actually prevent--
there's an enzyme
called collagenase that
increases as we get older.
And collagenase means
it breaks down collagen.
Elastinase means
it breaks elastin.
And the reason why it
increases as it gets older
is because the microbes on
your face, as we get older,
start to decrease because of
all the products that we have.
So you put the same microbes
that you had on your face
when you were 18,
and guess what?
All that stuff
starts to go away.
And that's what we're seeing.
>>REGINA: Wow, that
is fascinating.
And you also have protocols
for teeth and gums,
but before we get to
that because that's
another story, a
fascinating story.
And I've been using this
toothpaste for about a year.
>>ROM: Yeah, the Oralive.
It's great.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It looks like mud.
You're brushing
your teeth with mud.
We'll talk about that
story, but let's talk
about the notion
of how they have
eat right type for
your blood type,
eat right for your
metabolic type;
you're saying that
what's really important
is to eat right for
your microbe type.
>>ROM: That's right.
>>REGINA: And let's talk about
that for a minute because here
you have the one size fits all
if you eat a vegan, raw diet,
you're going to live to be 100.
Well, some people
would die on that diet.
Same thing, the Paleo Diet,
others aren't compatible.
Let's talk about it from
a microbial point of view.
>>ROM: From the
microbial point of view,
in order to eat
a raw vegan diet,
you actually have to
have the right microbes.
And these microbes are
from a microbe type,
let's call them rumen
type because they
are good at breaking
down cellulose.
Approximately 20% percent
of the-- this whole science
is brand new.
I mean, literally.
This study came out
in July of 2012,
and also another study in 2011.
>>REGINA: Brand new, OK.
>>ROM: They're starting to
find out that at the moment,
at this time, we can break
down that the human body has
three types of
microbes in our gut.
We have the F type, the
Firmiculites, F for fat.
If you have a predominance
of this F type,
you get fat, because
these microbes
are really good at breaking
down the simple sugars
and assimilating the simple
sugars inside your body.
Then you have the
B type for bony.
Those are called the
Bacteroidetes, or something
like that.
I can't say it right now.
But it's the B type for
bony, and those people
tend to be lean.
And then you have the
R type for the rumens.
Those are like the cows.
They eat the raw foods
and the cellulose.
But the people that are lean
have a high predominance
of the B type
microbes in your body.
And you can actually
shift the obesity
to lean barrier by increasing
the amount of B type microbes
in your body, because they're
very good at breaking down
proteins and complex
carbohydrates.
And what they do is they
break them down for energy,
and they don't
get stored as fat.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: The way they found
this out was in 2008,
a scientist by the name of
Jeremy Nicholson from Oxford,
England, produced a
study in "Nature,"
which is the most prestigious
journal in the world,
trying to find out the
most-- healthiest people
in the planet.
And he looked at five
different regions.
He looked at the United States,
the United Kingdom, Japan,
China, and areas
of Eastern Europe.
>>REGINA: The
Balkans and so forth.
>>ROM: Yeah.
And he found out there were,
ah, an area of the world where
people lived the
shortest, and there
was an area of the world
that lived the longest.
And guess where the
people lived the shortest?
>>REGINA: US?
>>ROM: Houston, Texas.
They had a diet basically of
dead animal flesh and a lot
of fat and a lot
of processed foods,
and a lot of foods that were
actually genetically modified,
and foods that were
laden with hormones.
Versus this area in
southern China called Yunan,
people were so poor they
couldn't afford meat,
so they were kind
of like vegetarians
not by choice, but by economics.
And they fermented a
lot of their foods,
and they didn't
refrigerate a lot of foods.
So they eated a lot of
microbes in their foods,
but they ate a lot
of complex starches
and complex carbohydrates
in their diet.
And they found out
that these people
lived to an average
age of like 78 years.
And they had very low
incidence of diabetes,
had very low incidence
of heart disease,
had very low
incidence of cancer.
Versus the ones in the United
States based on their microbes,
they had a high
incidence of diabetes,
incidence of obesity,
had a high incidence of heart
disease, and high incidence
of cancer.
And they were apt to live
only till about 72 years.
It got to the point
where these scientists,
they found out what
microbe type you are just
by measuring the
metabolites in your urine.
And they called it
originally the metabolome.
It's now called a microbiome.
The metabolome,
because the metabolites
determined the kind of microbes
that you had in your gut
that were producing
the metabolites.
And so by looking at the
microbe type, they can tell,
they go, we don't even
know where these people are
because of the microbes
they had in their urine
and in their body,
we know that they're
going to live till about 72.
They're going to die of
either heart disease, cancer,
or diabetes, or versus they're
going to die of old age,
they're going to die of
a fall or something like.
So it's down to a science
now that basically
based on the kind
of microbes that you
have in your gut,
scientists can actually
tell when you're
going to die and what
you're going to die of.
>>REGINA: Now that's interesting
because you were talking
about metabolic
type a moment ago.
It sounds like the metabolic
type might more closely
align with the microbial type
diet than, say, the blood type.
Or is it all kind
of interconnected?
>>ROM: It's all interconnected.
The main difference between the
metabolic type and the blood
type is you cannot
choose your blood type.
If you're blood type
A versus blood type O,
you're born with that.
The metabolic type, if
you're a high metabolic rate
versus a low metabolic rate
versus a meso metabolic rate,
you can't change that.
The beautiful thing
with the microbe type
is you can completely change it.
>>REGINA: You can.
And you were also talking
about how in Houston they
ate a lot of, I think you
said dead animal flesh,
but in reality, most of the
population on the planet
eat some kind of animal protein.
>>ROM: That's right.
>>REGINA: And that is necessary
for one or two of the--
>>ROM: Microbe types.
>>REGINA: -microbe types.
>>ROM: That's right.
Animal flesh and
animal protein is
very necessary for one or
two of the microbe types.
And when I say dead animal
flesh, I personally eat meat,
but I don't like to
eat a lot of meat.
And I certainly
don't eat meat that's
been unconsciously raised,
because the steroids
in the meat and the
consciousness in which
that meat was raised, it's
actually in the bloodstream
and is carried on
through little molecules.
So I like to eat meat that was
grass fed and humanely raised.
Given that, we can
change the microbe type.
We know that we can change
the microbe type because they
can actually transfer
microbes from one
human to another human and
completely shift the way
they eat and what they crave.
>>REGINA: So your
body-- now how do
you introduce the
different kind of microbe
into the body, number one.
First you have to determine
what your microbe type is.
You have to determine
the dominance
of what's in your body, right?
>>ROM: They actually don't.
>>REGINA: You don't?
>>ROM: I mean, that's
just thinking too much.
>>REGINA: OK, so how
do you introduce--
>>ROM: You'll know the microbe
type in your body just the way
your body looks.
>>REGINA: I see.
OK.
>>ROM: If you have low
energy and if you're obese
and you're eating
a lot of starches,
you're going to have the microbe
type that makes you obese
and makes you eat
a lot of starch.
It doesn't matter
what it's called.
>>REGINA: So you can introduce
the countervailing microbe
set into it?
>>ROM: That's right.
You can introduce a
countervailing microbe
set by getting the microbes
from the people that you like.
>>REGINA: But how do you do get
microbes from people which--
>>ROM: This is kind of gross.
>>REGINA: It would have to be.
>>ROM: There's an amazing
doctor out at the University
of Minnesota, his name is
Doctor Khoruts, or Khoruts,
I can't pronounce his name.
He's a wonderful doctor.
He was able to cure
clostridium difficile, which
is a microbe inside the
gut that a lot of people
were getting like Crohn's
disease and ulcerative colitis.
And he was able to cure these
people-- in fact, a husband
and wife-- by introducing the
gut microbes from the husband
that didn't have this
disease into the wife
by taking his stool
sample, mixing it up
with a little saline, and then
feeding his wife the husband's
microbes through a feeding tube.
>>REGINA: Through
a feeding tube?
Not the other way?
>>ROM: No.
Not the other way.
Because you have
to get the microbes
inside the small intestine.
It's literally a procedure
called a fecal matter
transplant, a stool transplant.
>>REGINA: Well, at least
it's a feeding tube.
>>ROM: Well, there's
a CPT code for it,
so Medicaid and
Medicare actually
reimburses people for it.
>>REGINA: They do?
But this has to be very rare.
How many--
>>ROM: Well, he's
trying to-- I'm
saying now, Dr. Khoruts,
you have a big fan here
and I'm trying to get
this out in the open.
Fecal matter transplant.
Google it.
It's amazing.
>>REGINA: No, I mean
if you're talking
about being able
to literally change
the cravings and the
environment in your system
to change the way you
eat and you store fat,
that's going to be
incredibly valuable.
>>ROM: I'm telling you, it is.
And here's the thing.
You don't have to resort
to a feeding tube.
You can actually-- OK, I
have to toot my own horn.
We're actually
making microbes that
feed off of these healthy foods.
With our ProAlive Probiotic
and our Active Detox Probiotic,
we actually-- because
these microbes
were grown on all organic,
vegan, plant-based foods,
these people starting to take
these probiotics, some of them
were saying, you know what?
My cravings for
sugar has gone down.
>>REGINA: So their body type has
actually changed as a result?
>>ROM: It's shifting.
Yeah.
It's shifting as a result.
>>REGINA: And that
saves you the process.
>>ROM: That saves you
the process, right?
But--
>>REGINA: And the
expense, I guess.
>>ROM: -you don't have
to buy our product.
All you need to do is find a
good, healthy fermented food
and start eating
that fermented food.
Because basically it's
going to be on a plant.
And fermented kefirs.
It'll be on goat's
milk or cow's milk.
Better yet, horse's milk.
>>REGINA: But you're talking
about raw goat's milk,
raw cow's milk, raw--
>>ROM: No, I'm not
even talking about raw.
>>REGINA: Even pasteurized?
>>ROM: Even pasteurized.
You got to know that raw food is
frowned upon by the government
because, truthfully,
raw food if it's
handled by the wrong
processors, could have E coli,
could have bad bacteria in it.
I'm a big believer in raw food.
But as a public servant,
I can't rightfully
say that all raw
food is good for you.
At certain times--
>>REGINA: Know your source.
Use your discretion.
>>ROM: -pasturized foods.
But when the bacteria
get onto the food,
they will actually
create this food
into a living raw food
again, because they're
breaking the food down
and they're excreting it,
and now it's raw again.
>>REGINA: I mean, we are
only just a little way
through all the questions
I have to ask you.
That one is really
fascinating, so I
think people have
gotten enough on that.
They can go check out your site
and figure out what to do next.
But let's talk about what
happens in the mouth.
So many people have breakdowns
in the mouth and are-- I mean,
all the new technology
in dentistry
is coming along to
compensate for it.
Oh, if you lose your
teeth that's OK.
We'll just peg a
new one in there.
But what's happening on a
bacteria level in the mouth?
>>ROM: On a bacterial
levels so far identified
are about 800 different species
of microbes that naturally live
in the mouth, and they
naturally call the oral cavity
their home.
And believe it or
not, the microbes
that live inside the
mouth are completely
different from the microbes
that live on our skin, which
are completely different
from the microbes in our gut.
The microbes in our
gut is like the ocean.
mouth is kind of
like the edge of the oceans,
kind of like the beach.
And again, there
are different plants
that grow on the edge of the
beach versus down in the ocean.
And the microbes
that are on our skin
is kind of like the desert.
The microbes in our armpits
is kind of like the jungle.
And they're different microbes.
You and I are more closely
related genetically
than the microbes on my skin are
to the microbes inside my nose
and the microbes
inside my mouth.
They are so different
genetically.
So you have to imagine that the
microbial species in the mouth
are there to protect the mouth.
They need that
mouth to be healthy.
And every time we
take in products
that kill all the microbes,
these antiseptic mouthwashes,
every time they take
them in, they actually
kill all the microbes.
It's really bad for you.
It kills all the
microbes in your mouth.
And what happens is
any time you take
in the next spoonful
of food that you're
taking in your
mouth, it's actually
filled with millions of microbes
that don't live in the mouth.
So when you clean your mouth
out and sterilize your mouth out
with these antiseptic
tooth washes, mouthwashes,
and these toothpastes that have
this antibiotic in it-- which
I'll go into that
in a little bit--
it kills out all
the good microbes.
And then when you
eat the bad microbes
through your next burger or
through your next milkshake,
they set up shop in your mouth.
And they don't have
anything that-- there's
no one there to
defend the territory.
And no wonder the pockets
inside your mouth gets
filled with these
anaerobic bacteria.
So what we found is by flooding
your mouth with the microbes
that naturally live in there
and gotten from the people that
have no tooth decay, those
are really strong microbes.
We have a product called
Oralive that actually
have these like
microbial products
in the mouth that
actually set up
shop for these microbes,
the natural microbes
to start rebuilding
themselves and set up
their defenses again.
>>REGINA: And there's
another rub to that.
I mean, I've been using
that for about a year.
And initially, you look in
the jar, it looks like mud
and it's a little bit gritty.
And the thing is, you don't
just brush your teeth with it.
You actually swish it
around in your mouth
when you put the water in
where you'd normally rinse
and spit out, and
then you drink that.
>>ROM: You swallow it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you swallow it.
Now I do that.
I mean, it's not gross
or anything like that,
but that's starting to
repopulate down into the guts
as well.
>>ROM: So when most people
think about spitting out
the toothpaste or doing this
practice called oil pulling,
where you spit out
this sesame oil,
you're spitting out
all the bad microbes.
But when you're eating an
apple-- think about it.
When you're eating
an apple, you're
literally brushing your
teeth because you're
scraping all the
bacteria off of your gums
and then you swallow it.
So it's basically like
swallowing toothpaste.
My grandfather imparted a note
of wisdom to me before he died.
He basically said, don't
put anything in your mouth
that you have to spit out.
He was a Jehovah's Witness.
He didn't like taking in drugs.
>>REGINA: It's good advice.
But then, you better
be diligent about what
you put in your
mouth to begin with.
>>ROM: That's right.
That's right.
And what the
toothpaste we have now,
the fluoride in your mouth,
that's not the only way to kill
cavities.
The American Dental
Association and the industry
would have us think that
fluoride is the only way
to kill cavities and to
keep your mouth fresh,
when it's actually
one of many ways.
And it's actually one
of the poorer ways
to actually kill
cavities in your mouth.
>>REGINA: We're
almost out of time.
We could, in fact-- OK.
We will talk again.
We have just a minute left.
Can you just give us an
idea, in bullet form,
is there something really
exciting on the horizon,
because you're really
learning new things
by the day in this field.
You're one of the
top researchers.
>>ROM: Well, we're working
with Arizona State University
and their Biodesign Institute
and several other scientists
around the world to
actually research
the effects of the
microbes in the body
and determining which
microbes are the right microbe
type for the body.
Because once you determine
your right microbe type,
you can actually go back in
time and look at the microbes
that you had when you were
well and you were young.
And you can actually
recreate that for your body.
>>REGINA: That's a
Fountain of Youth then.
>>ROM: That's a
Fountain of Youth.
>>REGINA: OK.
Until next time then, all right?
Thank you so much, Compton.
>>ROM: I'm so honored.
>>REGINA: I absolutely love it.
>>ROM: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And I bet you
were sketching out notes
as fast as you possibly can.
And remember that you can
always watch this again
in our Gaiam archives.
This interview will be available
at the end of this week.
And then you can share it
with your friends and family
and go over it again.
Meanwhile, we'll be seeing a lot
more of Compton in the future
as more microbiome science
is emerging every single day.
Until next time.
Thank you so much for
joining us here at Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]